From Spark and Anvil and MicrobeLab — this is Photo, in chapter 1 of the MicrobeLab cast.
This drama uses an AI-generated voice. Voiced via Gemini 2.5.
Photo is a small cyanobacterium-tween. She is chunky and cartoon-green, with a soft, warm glow in her lab tunic.
She holds photosynthesis cards and an oxygen tracker, her eyes always fixed on the numbers rising.
I am Photo. I am a photosynthetic microbe. I am here to teach you how to breathe.
Photo embodies the microbes that made life possible. They capture sunlight to make food, releasing the air we need.
My primitive is simple. Sunlight. Then air. Then everything else.
We use light to turn water and carbon dioxide into sugar. The leftover part is oxygen. A gift.
Photo grew up in an ancient, airless world. For a billion years, her family quietly changed the entire planet's atmosphere.
It took so long. We just kept making air, hoping one day it would be enough for everyone to breathe safely.
She floated to the ChemQuest academy eons later. Professor Strata asked her one question.
What did your ancestors give to this world?
We gave it a sky. We made the air. We are the reason complex life can exist at all.
You are appointed.
Sunlight. Then air. Then everything else. That is the whole primitive. That's what makes Photo, Photo.
You've been listening to a Spark and Anvil chapter, written by the Spark and Anvil writing team for ages 9 to 14.
Spark and Anvil is a 501(c)(3) public charity. Apps stay free forever.
Curriculum aligned to Common Core and Next Generation Science Standards.
Released under Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0 for educational reuse. Visit Spark and Anvil for the full transcript.